---
layout: post
title: Goodies
---

{{ page.title }}
----------------

<p class="publish_date">
24 July 2019
</p>

From time to time there are some goodie scripts that I would like to share; 

Like this one - I have it in my .bashrc file; If the current directory of the shell is in a git repo, then it searches in all files that are in the repo.
Helps to distinguish between proper source files and generated files (if you are using code generation as part of the build process then that can be quite useful)

<blockquote>
    <code><pre>
# grep in git files
gitgrep()
{
    # find the top level directory for this git repository
    TOP_DIR=`git rev-parse --show-toplevel 2>/dev/null`
    if [ "x$TOP_DIR" != "x" ]; then
        pushd $TOP_DIR >/dev/null
        # search in all files, they are now relative to repo root dir; so prepend the repo dir to get full path
        git ls-files -z | xargs -0 grep $* | while IFS= read -r line; do printf '%s%s\n' "$TOP_DIR" "$line"; done
        popd >/dev/null
    else 
        echo "$PWD is not a git repo"
    fi
}
    </pre></code>

</blockquote>


Other variants of grep (that's aparrently what I do all day ;-)
Even doing a combination of find / xarg / grep is a science all by itself - if you find a file with a space it it then it will be skipped.
find -print0 terminates each line with a 0 character, but then yo have to tell xargs -0 to get it back.
Everything so damn complicated.

<blockquote>
    <code><pre>
# grep in cpp sources
s()
{
  find . -type f \( -name '*.cpp' -o -name '*.hpp' -o -name '*.h' \) -print0 2>/dev/null | xargs -0 grep $*
}

# grep in python files
p()
{
  find . -name '*.py' -print0 2>/dev/null | xargs -0 grep $*
}
    </pre></code>

</blockquote>

Building of ctags file, again doing that in the repo root (to get all files); ctags has quite an involved command line all by itself.

<blockquote>
    <code><pre>
# build ctags
ctg()
{
  # find the top level directory for this git repository
  TOP_DIR=`git rev-parse --show-toplevel 2>/dev/null`
  if [ "x$TOP_DIR" != "x" ]; then
      pushd $TOP_DIR >/dev/null
      rm tags 2>/dev/null
      find . -type f \( -name '*.cpp' -o -name '*.hpp' -o -name '*.h' \) -print 0 | xargs -0 ctags -a --c++-kinds=+p --fields=+iaS --extra=+q --language-force=C++   
      popd >/dev/null
  else 
        echo "$PWD is not a git repo"
  fi
}
    </pre></code>

</blockquote>


Having the name of the git branch in the bash command prompt - quite essential if you are working with multiple branches, it helps to avoid some effort while working on the wrong branch.
Having the branch name without colors that's fine; but when you want colors with bash then things become messy.


<blockquote>
    <code><pre>
# Git branch in prompt.
parse_git_branch() {
    git branch 2> /dev/null | sed -e '/^[^*]/d' -e 's/* \(.*\)/ (\1)/'
}

PS1="[\u@\h \W\$(parse_git_branch)]\$ "

# strange: when I log in with the color prompt, then I have to resource the shell, else git branch doesn't display.
#PS1="[\e[0;34m\u@\h\e[m \W\\e[0;35m$(parse_git_branch)\e[m]\$ "

# but don't need to do that with uniform coloring ... as awayls strange hickups upon non-trivial usage...
#PS1="[\e[0;35m\u@\h \W\$(parse_git_branch)\e[m]\$ "
    </pre></code>

</blockquote>



