---
layout: post
title: <notextile>quote of the day</notextile>
---

{{ page.title }}
----------------

<p class="publish_date">
27 September 2012

</p>
<br><br>&quot;Life was simple before World War II. After that, we had systems.&quot; Grace Hopper&nbsp;<a class="ot-anchor" href="http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Grace_Hopper" rel="nofollow">http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Grace_Hopper</a>

Other quotes from the interent, I added them to the bugzilla quips at work:

<pre>
C++ : increment the value of C and use the old one

"Everyone knows that debugging is twice as hard as writing a program in the first place. So if you're as clever as you can be when you write it, how will you ever debug it?" Brian W. Kernighan and P. J. Plauger ("The Elements of Programming style") 
"Computers in the future may weigh no more than 1.5 tons." - Popular Mechanics, 1949

A good advice from Bugs Bunny: Jump to the next bug and be happy.

There are two ways to write error-free programs; only the third one works.

Simplicity is prerequisite for reliability. (Edsger Dijkstra)

"In times of crisis, it is of utmost importance not to lose one's head." -- M. Antoinette

The proof of a system's value is its existence.

... and then I went from "why doesn't this work?" to "why did this ever work?"

\[expletive deleted\]

Can we fix it? Yes, we can!

War is Peace. Freedom is Slavery. Ignorance is Strength.

Parse error at byte 9 (line 1): unexpected token

Programmer: an organism that turns coffee into software

Programs for sale: fast, reliable, cheap - choose two. ~Author Unknown

One man's crappy software is another man's full time job. ~Jessica Gaston

“Quotes on the internet are often inaccurate” - Abraham Lincoln
</pre>
