---
layout: post
title: <notextile>Philg why aren&#39;t there more software developers?</notextile>
---
h2. {{ page.title }}
<p class="publish_date">04 May 2013</p>

<a class="ot-anchor" href="http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/philg/2013/05/01/why-isnt-there-a-glut-of-good-software-engineers/comment-page-2/#comment-197727" rel="nofollow">http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/philg/2013/05/01/why-isnt-there-a-glut-of-good-software-engineers/comment-page-2/#comment-197727</a><br>


Interesting discussion on: "Why aren't there lots of people from third world countries who learned programming from the internet, and who could then flock to the first world as gastarbeiters"

Here are my comments:
--------
Phil, you site open source projects as reputation builders.
Do employers really value open source contributions? My experience is that management sees them as distractions; things that can steal valuable company time;
Other indications are that open source people are seen as not pliant enough; and people with too strong opinions of their own are not valued int the market.
In general I don't know if I should hide my open source projects on the CV or not.

----

On a practical note; I think the open source movement comes with its culture of sharing and its own set of ideas; the whole thing came out of the Hippy movement (just look at the long beard of Mr. Stallman ;-)
Now with all things cultural there comes the same problem: it is hard to transplant a given culture into the third world; all third world countries come with their own culture, with their own system of values. a foreign culture can&rsquo;t be simply transplanted into the third world, it can be adopted, but the process takes time.

--------

Also: 'long time programmer' wrote, and I sort of agree with him:

"I've been the software industry for 30 years, both technical and business roles.
There is a shortage of software engineers because the average career of a code writing engineer is short &ndash; less than 5 years.
Most hands on software work is crappy. Fix an obscure bug in legacy code. Write a data filter to bulk load reference data. Rewrite some commodity functions for the zillionth time because the managers don't want code that wasn't invented here.
Getting assignments that lead to career development is hard. In any large engineering team, the politics are rough. Getting the best work is like fighting a pack of wolves fighting over a deer. Only the strongest survive.
The way to survive is to have both top technical skills (especially the skill to learn new technology fast), and have top social skills. To use the wolf analogy, you must be able to bring down the biggest deer, and defend it from the others. Let the others have the bones (i.e., the crappy assignments). They'll soon starve and leave. There is a shortage of software engineers because few people can mix the technical and social skills necessary to survive for long."

--------

is politics/struggle for good assignment really that rough? Large chunk of it is being there early: for a startup that means being among the first developers, for a larger project that means to be when it all starts. During the early cycle of a start up you usually have better choices and get the more interesting part; On the other hand surviving in a start up / choosing the right one to begin with are matters that require politics and analytical skills.

