---
layout: post
title: <notextile>Bye bye Google reader, thanks for all the fish</notextile>
---
h2. {{ page.title }}
<p class="publish_date">04 April 2013</p>

<notextile>
<br><br>Google is shutting down google reader. They could have turned it into a paid service, given that it has so many active users who value this service. What would be the arguments against such a move?<br><br>&nbsp;<a class="ot-anchor" href="http://googleblog.blogspot.co.il/2013/03/a-second-spring-of-cleaning.html" rel="nofollow">http://googleblog.blogspot.co.il/2013/03/a-second-spring-of-cleaning.html</a><br><br>Why? Too much effort to keep systems going; also they might think that this market is a &#39;race to the bottom&#39;; no matter what price they set, there is somebody to offer a lower price; maybe its a question of focus: asking end users for money is not their main line of business - after all they are all about selling adds.<br><br>This guy talks some sense on the issue! He says that&nbsp;<br>* google must get rid of olden things, otherwise the cruft will keep it from going forward<br>* &nbsp;The issue is to keep the share price up; share price is subjective, so this is about sending out messages of agility and product focus to the market<br>* they could have done it before,( I think that they did not want to upset geek users when they needed them as core users for google+ )<br><br><a class="ot-anchor" href="http://dolboeb.livejournal.com/2480984.html" rel="nofollow">http://dolboeb.livejournal.com/2480984.html</a><br><br>AND ... Our google masters want us to work; instead of having us all day in the reader while following feeds ;-)<br><br>No, people get upset if asked to pay for free services; and they wouldn&#39;t pay anyway. Just reminds me how little I know about business .... <a class="ot-anchor" href="http://www.npr.org/blogs/money/2012/07/13/156737801/the-cost-of-free-doughnuts-70-years-of-regret" rel="nofollow">http://www.npr.org/blogs/money/2012/07/13/156737801/the-cost-of-free-doughnuts-70-years-of-regret</a><br><br>... another point - RSS is not social enough; no big daddy can&#39;t track who is subscribing, who your friends are and when they are visiting; so there are no social graphs to build. Therefore Google wants this technology gone; no RSS for google+ feeds that is ;-)
</notextile>
