---
layout: post
title: Peak advertising
---
h2. {{ page.title }}
<p class="publish_date">14 October 2013</p>

Peak advertising

"This article":http://peakads.org/images/Peak_Ads.pdf by Tim Hwang and Adi Kamdar argues that online advertising will become less efficient over time; the argument is that

* younger people do not react to advertising as much as older people
* saturation: lots of adds everywhere, so nobody gives a damn;
* add blocking is a result of that.
* click fraud: the opportunity makes the thieve.

As a result they see the following trends
* advertising is concentrating around a few monopolies (also known as 'add platforms')
* invasions of privacy by add platforms: add platforms want to know more about us in order to make more efficient add placements; they create a model of our interest and want to 
  match the adds to this model of our 'online self'

They forecast that we will see more adds in the online material (payed for articles as adds).

Is that really so?

It may be all true, but the competition is also bleeding: Cable TV companies seem to be suffering from falling subscriptions ("here":http://bgr.com/2012/08/02/cable-tv-subscriber-stats-q2-2012-satellite/ )
So the audience for online content will be growing, as a result of the problems that traditional media is facing.

Is it really that important to spy after the users? 
* There is the possibility of merging online content and advertising: 
  Look at Amazon, when one buys a book, one gets the offer for related books "People who bought this book also bought ..."
  Amazon is making a lot of money around that offer.
* It may be enough to understand the online content, and to pair in adds that are related to online content.
* A better understanding of the served content vs served adds would require less intrusive user data gathering on the part of the 
  'add platforms'
* Also there seems to be at least some degree of consumer backslash: The search engine "Duck duck go":https://duckduckgo.com/ promises more privacy than
  its competitors; So thanks to the Snowden revelations it has seen some "remarkable growth":https://duckduckgo.com/traffic.html
  So far that may be a "nerdy" trend, but over times "nerdy" trends tend to be accepted by the larger public.
* Placement of adds based on the served online content is quite a technological challenge, this would open up opportunities
  for newer players, maybe this has the potential of offsetting the trend for growing monopolies.
