---
layout: post
title: <notextile>A song...</notextile>
---
h2. {{ page.title }}
<p class="publish_date">13 May 2013</p>


This ever changing post is about Music

----------------------

For me this is the ultimate Rock & Roll song of my generation; 
It's very much about the end of Soviet / post soviet periods.

"Аквариум Этот поезд в огне":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P1nAnLzcfrY

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/P1nAnLzcfrY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
Still, for me the essence of Rock & Roll music is deep introspective but nevertheless nihilistic bitching; For me the crisis of Rock & Roll goes hand in hand with this approach: it gives relieve to the ailing soul, but it does not give answers. I can see this clearly in the "interview with Boris Grebenchekov":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_THqHI5y2KI

Here is my translation of the lyrics:

This Train's in flames by "Boris Grebenshikov":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boris_Grebenshchikov

Colonel Vasin got back to the frontline
He took along his young wife
Colonel Vasin gathered his troops
and declared 'let's get back to our homes
We're already fighting for seventy years 
And they taught us that life is a battle
It's the Intel that established as fact
Those who we fought were our own selves'

( or rather: Those who we fought were of our own' )
   
Saw generals in high places
They eat and drink our death
Their kids all go crazy
Cause there's nothing for them left to want
And the land is left corroded
And churches are mixed in with dust
If we want that there's some spot to return to
Then now is the time to come home"

This train is in flames, and no levers are left to pull
This train is in flames, and there's no place to run to,
This land it was ours, until we got trapped up in the fight
As no-mans land	it will perish; time to return it to ourselves
 
Torches burn all around us
All demised troops are summoned up
And people who shot at our fathers
Make plans to finish off with our kids
We were born to the sound of the marches
They menaced us with gaol
But enough, enough of the grovel
We have already returned back home

This train is in flames, and no levers are left to pull
This train is in flames, and there's no place to run to,
This land it was ours, until we got trapped up in the fight
As no-mans land	it will perish; time to return it to ourselves



Other songs by the Grebenchikov

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/8SbOAFrZDAE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/LcgywNSTRGE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---------------------

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/5i15CjMG0WE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I don't agree with the song, except for one magical phrase:

<blockquote>
"Nehmt euch die Freiheit, sonst kommt sie nie!"
<p>
"You Take yourself the freedom, else she will never come"
</blockquote>

That's it: freedom is always an initiative that fights itself up from below.
and that's the magic of open source software; the freedom to use the computer as it suites you, fought for by geeks like me.

(However: most closed systems like phones work on operating systems derived from BSD or Linux; so in the end everything can be corrupted)

<blockquote>

Что один человек сделал другой завсегда сломать сможет - Кузнец из "Формулы любви"

What is made by one man can always be undone / broken by another
     Character of Blacksmith from the film "The formula of love"
</blockquote>

---------------------


<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/EWuotfT_j6s" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

A very existential song; so much compressed into just a few words.
The commercial that says it all, now thats art. 

<blockquote>
Boy: What's for tea, Mum?
Grown up: What's for tea, darling? (pause) Darling, I said "what's for tea?"
old Gent: What's for tea, daughter?

Heinz baked beans
</blockquote>

---------------------
Ost/West Überblick.

... graue menschen mit grauen gedanken glotzen auf mich denn ich bin nicht grau. ICH BIN BUNT ICH BIN BUNT ICH LIEBE FARBEN ROT SCHWARZ GR&Uuml;N BLAU!!!


<iframe width="420" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/0aO-ykEv4Nw" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


---------------------

An amazing song, so many things stuffed into 4 minutes 10 seconds. Wow!

Tom Rush - Child's Song
<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/8Dx6Zdx2AJ4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---------------------
The Free Design - an amazing band from far far away and very long ago. Wikipedia says that his music is called 'Sunshine Pop' with elements of Jazz, part lullaby (for grown ups who still like Sesame Street); amazing;

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/vvLO1i0mTIo" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/MUw8bxYgyTE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
---------------------

I think that the phrase "I'll keep you warm and you keep me sane" is very clever and deep one, it only appears in the lyrics of the "song Apeman:"http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/format/apeman.html

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/eEep67akIn4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---------------------

A beautiful song "Who knows where the time goes - Fairport Convention":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2xODjbfYw8 

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/n2xODjbfYw8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

; Some see this band as part of the "Cantebury scene":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canterbury_scene ("here":http://www.yourcanterbury.co.uk/leisure/fairport_convention_celebrate_45_years_in_the_business_1_1359660 it is mentioned as such) I find it all very amazing; they are not just banging on the instruments, I mean they are real musicians and poets, all in one ...


<notextile>
<br><br>&quot;Who knows where the time goes&quot; by Sandy Denny<br><br>Across the evening sky, all the birds are leaving<br>But how can they know it&#39;s time for them to go?<br>Before the winter fire, I will still be dreaming<br>I have no thought of time<br>For who knows where the time goes?<br>Who knows where the time goes?<br>Sad, deserted shore, your fickle friends are leaving<br>Ah, but then you know it&#39;s time for them to go<br>But I will still be here, I have no thought of leaving<br>I do not count the time<br>For who knows where the time goes?<br>Who knows where the time goes?<br>And I am not alone while my love is near me<br>I know it will be so until it&#39;s time to go<br>So come the storms of winter and then the birds in spring again<br>I have no fear of time<br>For who knows how my love grows?<br>And who knows where the time goes?
</notextile>
