---
layout: post
title:  Roget Thesaurus parser
---

h2. {{ page.title }}
<p class="publish_date">26 February 2015</p>

The Roget thesaurus does not seem to be widely used in natural language processing, for example the Stanford NLP course does not even mention it at all; instead they seem to focus on the "Wordnet":http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/webwn thesaurus.

I think that the Roget thesaurus has a lot to offer here:

* the thesaurus is in the public domain, so it can be used for free
* The ontology/classification of Roget is more shallow than that of Wordnet, i think that would makes it easier to work with
* In Roget thesaurus the word senses are grouped around Head words; each of these head words is also classified within the ontology

the structure of the Roget thesaurus would be of advantages for such task as finding word similarities; two words or expressions that share the same head word would count as similar words. 

In this project i have written a module in the python program language that parses the text of the Roget thesaurus from project Gutenberg, as a result it creates a data structure that represents the Roget thesaurus in memory. This data structure tries to preserve all information that is contained in the text of the thesaurus,
, it allows a program to look up the word senses and to navigate through the ontology.

The text that is parsed is based on the following source ( "here":https://archive.org/details/rogetsthesauruso10681gut )
I am not quite sure as to which edition of the Roget thesaurus that is;


h3. Obtaining the program

Please download the roget.py script "here":https://raw.githubusercontent.com/MoserMichael/cstuff/master/python/roget.py 
 ; you also have to download this "text of the Roget thesaurus "here":https://raw.githubusercontent.com/MoserMichael/cstuff/master/python/10681-body.txt and place this file into the same directory as the roget.py file. Please note that I had to edit the text of the Roget thesaurus  and remove some ambiguous constructs so that it is better suited for parsing.

One of the results of this study is the Roget thesaurus in machine readable xml "see here":http://mosermichael.github.io/cstuff/docs/html/python/roget-out.xml (warning if you click on the last link then that will open the xml file for viewing, that will take about a minute)

The html reference for the roget.py python module is "here":http://mosermichael.github.io/cstuff/docs/html/python/roget.html

h3. the Roget Thesaurus

The Thesaurus classifies word senses into the following ontology

Each category is represented by a Node of type Category, this hierarchy is represented by a tree structure of nodes, each of them is of type Category.

<blockquote><pre><code>
Category - root ()
	Category - CLASS I (WORDS EXPRESSING ABSTRACT RELATIONS)
		Category - SECTION I. (EXISTENCE)
			Category (1. BEING, IN THE ABSTRACT)
			Category (2. BEING, IN THE CONCRETE)
			Category (3. FORMAL EXISTENCE)
				Category (Internal conditions)
				Category (External conditions)
			Category (4. MODAL EXISTENCE)
				Category (Absolute)
				Category (Relative)
		Category - SECTION II. (RELATION)
			Category (1. ABSOLUTE RELATION)
			Category (2. CONTINUOUS RELATION)
			Category (3. PARTIAL RELATION)
			Category (4. GENERAL RELATION)
		Category - SECTION III. (QUANTITY)
			Category (1. SIMPLE QUANTITY)
			Category (2. COMPARATIVE QUANTITY)
				Category (1 QUANTITY BY COMPARISON WITH A STANDARD)
				Category (2 QUANTITY BY COMPARISON WITH A SIMILAR OBJECT)
				Category (3 CHANGES IN QUANTITY)
			Category (3. CONJUNCTIVE QUANTITY)
			Category (4. CONCRETE QUANTITY)
		Category - SECTION IV. (ORDER)
			Category (1. ORDER IN GENERAL)
			Category (2. CONSECUTIVE ORDER)
			Category (3. COLLECTIVE ORDER)
			Category (4. DISTRIBUTIVE ORDER)
			Category (5. ORDER AS REGARDS CATEGORIES)
		Category - SECTION V. (NUMBER)
			Category (1. NUMBER, IN THE ABSTRACT)
			Category (2. DETERMINATE NUMBER)
			Category (3. INDETERMINATE NUMBER)
		Category - SECTION VI. (TIME)
			Category (1. ABSOLUTE TIME)
			Category (2. RELATIVE TIME)
				Category (1. Time with reference to Succession)
			Category (3. RECURRENT TIME)
		Category - SECTION VII. (CHANGE)
			Category (1. SIMPLE CHANGE)
			Category (2. COMPLEX CHANGE)
				Category (Present Events)
				Category (Future Events)
		Category - SECTION VIII. (CAUSATION)
			Category (1. CONSTANCY OF SEQUENCE IN EVENTS)
			Category (2. CONNECTION BETWEEN CAUSE AND EFFECT)
			Category (3. POWER IN OPERATION)
			Category (4. INDIRECT POWER)
			Category (5. COMBINATIONS OF CAUSES)
	Category - CLASS II (WORDS RELATING TO SPACE)
		Category - SECTION I. (SPACE IN GENERAL)
			Category (1. ABSTRACT SPACE)
			Category (2. RELATIVE SPACE)
			Category (3. EXISTENCE IN SPACE)
		Category - SECTION II. (DIMENSIONS)
			Category (1. GENERAL DIMENSIONS)
			Category (2. LINEAR DIMENSIONS)
			Category (3. CENTRICAL DIMENSIONS)
				Category (1. General.)
				Category (2. Special)
		Category - SECTION III. (FORM)
			Category (1. GENERAL FORM)
			Category (2. SPECIAL FORM)
			Category (3. SUPERFICIAL FORM)
		Category - SECTION IV. (MOTION)
			Category (1. MOTION IN GENERAL)
			Category (2. DEGREES OF MOTION)
			Category (3. MOTION CONJOINED WITH FORCE)
			Category (4. MOTION WITH REFERENCE TO DIRECTION)
	Category - CLASS III (WORDS RELATING TO MATTER)
		Category - SECTION I. (MATTER IN GENERAL)
		Category - SECTION II. (INORGANIC MATTER)
			Category (1. SOLID MATTER)
			Category (2. FLUID MATTER)
			Category (3. IMPERFECT FLUIDS)
		Category - SECTION III. (ORGANIC MATTER)
			Category (1. VITALITY)
				Category (1. Vitality in general)
				Category (2. Special Vitality)
			Category (2. SENSATION)
				Category (1. Sensation in general)
				Category (2. Special Sensation)
				Category ((1) Touch)
				Category ((2) Heat)
				Category ((4) Odor)
				Category ((5) Sound)
				Category ((i) SOUND IN GENERAL)
				Category ((ii) SPECIFIC SOUNDS)
				Category ((iii) MUSICAL SOUNDS)
				Category ((iv) PERCEPTION OF SOUND)
				Category ((6) Light)
				Category ((i) LIGHT IN GENERAL)
				Category ((ii) SPECIFIC LIGHT)
				Category (Primitive Colors)
				Category (Complementary Colors)
				Category ((iii) PERCEPTIONS OF LIGHT)
	Category - CLASS IV (WORDS RELATING TO THE INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES)
		Category - DIVISION I (FORMATION OF IDEAS)
			Category - SECTION I. (OPERATIONS OF INTELLECT IN GENERAL)
			Category - SECTION II. (PRECURSORY CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS)
			Category - SECTION III. (MATERIALS FOR REASONING)
				Category (Evidence for, against, and in mitigation)
			Category - SECTION IV. (REASONING PROCESSES)
			Category - SECTION V. (RESULTS OF REASONING)
			Category - SECTION VI (EXTENSION OF THOUGHT)
				Category (1. To the Past)
			Category - SECTION VII. (CREATIVE THOUGHT)
		Category - DIVISION II (COMMUNICATION OF IDEAS)
			Category - SECTION I. (NATURE OF IDEAS COMMUNICATED)
			Category - SECTION II. (MODES OF COMMUNICATION)
			Category - SECTION III. (MEANS OF COMMUNICATING IDEAS)
				Category (1. NATURAL MEANS)
				Category (2. CONVENTIONAL MEANS)
					Category (1. Language generally)
					Category (2. Spoken Language)
					Category (3. Written Language)
	Category - CLASS V (WORDS RELATING TO THE VOLUNTARY POWERS)
		Category - DIVISION I (INDIVIDUAL VOLITION)
			Category - SECTION I. (VOLITION IN GENERAL)
				Category (1. Acts of Volition)
				Category (2. Causes of Volition)
				Category (3. Objects of Volition)
			Category - SECTION II. (PROSPECTIVE VOLITION)
				Category (1. CONCEPTIONAL VOLITION)
				Category (2. SUBSERVIENCE TO ENDS)
					Category (1. Actual Subservience)
				Category (3. PRECURSORY MEASURES)
			Category - SECTION III. (VOLUNTARY ACTION)
				Category (1. Simple voluntary Action)
				Category (2. Complex Voluntary Action)
			Category - SECTION IV. (ANTAGONISM)
				Category (1. Conditional Antagonism)
				Category (2. Active Antagonism)
			Category - SECTION V. (RESULTS OF VOLUNTARY ACTION)
		Category - DIVISION II (INTERSOCIAL VOLITION)
			Category - SECTION I. (GENERAL INTERSOCIAL VOLITION)
			Category - SECTION II. (SPECIAL INTERSOCIAL VOLITION)
			Category - SECTION III. (CONDITIONAL INTERSOCIAL VOLITION)
			Category - SECTION IV. (POSSESSIVE RELATIONS)
				Category (1. Property in general)
				Category (2. Transfer of Property)
				Category (3. Interchange of Property)
				Category (4. Monetary Relations)
	Category - CLASS VI (WORDS RELATING TO THE SENTIENT AND MORAL POWERS)
		Category - SECTION I. (AFFECTIONS IN GENERAL)
		Category - SECTION II (PERSONAL AFFECTIONS)
			Category (1. PASSIVE AFFECTIONS)
			Category (2. DISCRIMINATIVE AFFECTIONS)
			Category (3. PROSPECTIVE AFFECTIONS)
			Category (4. CONTEMPLATIVE AFFECTIONS)
			Category (5. EXTRINSIC AFFECTIONS)
		Category - SECTION III. (SYMPATHETIC AFFECTIONS)
			Category (1. SOCIAL AFFECTIONS)
			Category (2. DIFFUSIVE SYMPATHETIC AFFECTIONS)
				Category (3. SPECIAL SYMPATHETIC AFFECTIONS)
				Category (4. RETROSPECTIVE SYMPATHETIC AFFECTIONS)
				Category (1. MORAL OBLIGATIONS)
				Category (2. MORAL SENTIMENTS)
				Category (3. MORAL CONDITIONS)
				Category (4. MORAL PRACTICE)
				Category (5. MORAL INSTITUTIONS)
				Category (1. SUPERHUMAN BEINGS AND REGIONS)
				Category (2. RELIGIOUS DOCTRINES)
				Category (3. RELIGIOUS SENTIMENTS)
				Category (4. ACTS OF RELIGION)
				Category (5. RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS)

</code></pre></blockquote>



In this tree there or leaf categories (an example of a leaf category is '1. BEING, IN THE ABSTRACT') the next level are head words;
Word senses cluster around this head word.

<blockquote><pre><code>
Category - root ()
	Category - CLASS I (WORDS EXPRESSING ABSTRACT RELATIONS)
		Category - SECTION I. (EXISTENCE)
			Category (1. BEING, IN THE ABSTRACT)
				#1 Headword (Existence)
				#2 Headword (Inexistence)
			Category (2. BEING, IN THE CONCRETE)
				#3 Headword (Substantiality)
				#4 Headword (Unsubstantiality)
			Category (3. FORMAL EXISTENCE)
				Category (Internal conditions)
					#5 Headword (Intrinsicality)
				Category (External conditions)
					#6 Headword (Extrinsicality)
			Category (4. MODAL EXISTENCE)
				Category (Absolute)
					#7 Headword (State)
				Category (Relative)
					#8 Headword (Circumstance)
		Category - SECTION II. (RELATION)
			Category (1. ABSOLUTE RELATION)
				#9 Headword (Relation)
				#10 Headword (Irrelation)
				#11 Headword (Consanguinity)
				#12 Headword (Correlation)
				#13 Headword (Identity)
				#14 Headword (Contrariety)
				#15 Headword (Difference)

. . . (lots more )
</code></pre></blockquote>


Here is one example head word from the text of the Thesaurus.

<blockquote>
CLASS I
WORDS EXPRESSING ABSTRACT RELATIONS

SECTION I.
EXISTENCE

1. BEING, IN THE ABSTRACT

1. Existence -- N. existence, being, entity, ens [Lat.], esse [Lat.],
subsistence.
     reality, actuality; positiveness &amp;c adj.; fact, matter of fact,
sober reality; truth &amp;c 494; actual existence.
     presence &amp;c (existence in space) 186; coexistence &amp;c 120.
     stubborn fact, hard fact; not a dream &amp;c 515; no joke.
     center of life, essence, inmost nature, inner reality, vital
principle [Science of existence], ontology.
V. exist, be; have being &amp;c n.; subsist, live, breathe, stand, obtain,
be the case; occur &amp;c (event) 151; have place, prevail; find oneself,
pass the time, vegetate.
     consist in, lie in; be comprised in, be contained in, be
constituted by.
     come into existence &amp;c n.; arise &amp;c (begin) 66; come forth &amp;c
(appear) 446.
     become &amp;c (be converted) 144; bring into existence &amp;c 161.
     abide, continue, endure, last, remain, stay.
Adj. existing &amp;c v.; existent, under the sun; in existence &amp;c n.;
extant; afloat, afoot, on foot, current, prevalent; undestroyed.
     real, actual, positive, absolute; true &amp;c 494; substantial,
substantive; self-existing, self-existent; essential.
     well-founded, well-grounded; unideal, unimagined; not potential &amp;c
2; authentic.
Adv. actually &amp;c adj.; in fact, in point of fact, in reality; indeed;
de facto, ipso facto.
Phr. ens rationis [Lat.]; ergo sum cogito [Lat.], thinkest thou
existence doth depend on time? [Byron].

</blockquote>

let us look at the head word Existence ; after the head words there is a set of word senses, where each word sense is separated by a comma or semicolon.
it seems that more closely related word senses are separated by comma, so the data structure will group these closely related senses under a Sense node
More loosely related word senses are separated by semicolon.

In the data structure each set of comma separated word senses has its own parent node of type SenseGroup; 
if a single word sense is followed by a semicolon then this is represented by a node that is placed directly under the head word node.

Note that some word senses have optional links to other head words.


Now here is a text report that describes this structure:

<blockquote><pre><code>
Category - root ()
	Category - CLASS I (WORDS EXPRESSING ABSTRACT RELATIONS)
		Category - SECTION I. (EXISTENCE)
			Category (1. BEING, IN THE ABSTRACT)
				#1 Headword (Existence)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (existence) /N/ 
						Sense (being)
						Sense (entity)
						Sense (ens) comment: Lat.
						Sense (esse) comment: Lat.
						Sense (subsistence)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (reality)
						Sense (actuality)
					Sense (positiveness) /Adj/ 
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (fact)
						Sense (matter of fact)
						Sense (sober reality)
					Sense (truth) [link: #494 (Truth) ]
					Sense (actual existence)
					Sense (presence) [link: #186 (Presence) ]
					Sense (coexistence) [link: #120 (Synchronism) ]
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (stubborn fact)
						Sense (hard fact)
					Sense (not a dream) [link: #515 (Imagination) ]
					Sense (no joke)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (center of life)
						Sense (essence)
						Sense (inmost nature)
						Sense (inner reality)
						Sense (vital principle) comment: Science of existence
						Sense (ontology)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (exist) /V/ 
						Sense (be)
					Sense (have being) /N/ 
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (subsist)
						Sense (live)
						Sense (breathe)
						Sense (stand)
						Sense (obtain)
						Sense (be the case)
					Sense (occur) [link: #151 (Eventuality) ]
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (have place)
						Sense (prevail)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (find oneself)
						Sense (pass the time)
						Sense (vegetate)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (consist in)
						Sense (lie in)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (be comprised in)
						Sense (be contained in)
						Sense (be constituted by)
					Sense (come into existence) /N/ 
					Sense (arise) [link: #66 (Beginning) ]
					Sense (come forth) [link: #446 (Visibility) ]
					Sense (become) [link: #144 (Conversion) ]
					Sense (bring into existence) [link: #161 (Production) ]
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (abide)
						Sense (continue)
						Sense (endure)
						Sense (last)
						Sense (remain)
						Sense (stay)
					Sense (existing) /Adj/ 
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (existent)
						Sense (under the sun)
					Sense (in existence) /N/ 
					Sense (extant)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (afloat)
						Sense (afoot)
						Sense (on foot)
						Sense (current)
						Sense (prevalent)
					Sense (undestroyed)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (real)
						Sense (actual)
						Sense (positive)
						Sense (absolute)
					Sense (true) [link: #494 (Truth) ]
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (substantial)
						Sense (substantive)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (self-existing)
						Sense (self-existent)
					Sense (essential)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (well-founded)
						Sense (well-grounded)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (unideal)
						Sense (unimagined)
					Sense (not potential) [link: #2 (Inexistence) ]
					Sense (authentic)
					Sense (actually) /Adv/ 
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (in fact)
						Sense (in point of fact)
						Sense (in reality)
					Sense (indeed)
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (de facto)
						Sense (ipso facto)
					Sense (ens rationis) /Phr/  comment: Lat.
					SenseGroup ()
						Sense (ergo sum cogito) comment: Lat.
						Sense (thinkest thou existence doth depend on time?) comment: Byron
</code></pre></blockquote>



h3. The programming interface

The html reference for the roget.py python module is "here":http://mosermichael.github.io/cstuff/docs/html/python/roget.html

In order to create an instance of the Roget Thesaurus class first construct an instance of RogetBuilder and then call the method parse - please note that the file 10681-body.txt  must be in the same directory as the script roget.py .

<blockquote><pre><code>	
import roget				 

builder = roget.RogetBuilder( 1 )
rogetThesaurus = builder.parse()
</code></pre></blockquote>


The following function will look up a word in the index of this class;  the word sense index is mapping the text of the word sense to a list of reference - each reference refers to the word sense as it appears in the Roget thesaurus. Given the node we can examine the node properties and navigate to the parent node, etc.

<blockquote><pre><code>	

def lookupWord( rogetThesaurus, word ):
    idx = rogetThesaurus.senseIndex
    wordSenses = idx[ word ]
    if wordSenses != None:	
	for s in wordSenses:
	    while s != None:
		print s.toString(), " / ",
		s = s.parent
	    print "\n"		
    else:
	print "no word senses found\n"



    lookupWord(rogetThesaurus, "fact")
    lookupWord(rogetThesaurus, "fiction")
    lookupWord(rogetThesaurus, "love")
    lookupWord(rogetThesaurus, "hate")

</code></pre></blockquote>


