---
layout: post
title: People turn sour when the weather turns bad
---

h2. {{ page.title }}
<p class="publish_date">19 July 2011</p>

A "hundred year drought":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4.2_kiloyear_event did occur somewhere 
around 2.200 BC, and as the weather turned nasty, so did politics. Both the Old Egyptian Empire and 
Akkadian Empires collapsed, there was no central government and order and concept of centralized 
rule / civilization took a break for two hundred years (the institution of civilization was closed for 
repairs).

Well, I don't quite know about the extent of that; somebody must have stayed in charge, at least 
locally. Ancient civilizations were dependent on their "Irrigation 
projects":http://mygeologypage.ucdavis.edu/cowen/~GEL115/115CH17oldirrigation.html  ; these 
systems have to be maintained constantly, otherwise they sustain irreparable damage . Anyway, it 
was "nasty":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ankhtifi  very "nasty":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ipuwer  ; 
this calamity also known as the "first intermediate 
period":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Intermediate_Period_of_Egypt  (nice name).

After this epic collapse, life seems to have been much more pleasant during the Middle Kingdom; One 
important ideological innovation of this time is Maat - The Order of Things with a capital letter 
(somehow the concept seems similar to the "Tao":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tao_of_Pooh ; 
though the concept was present in the Old Kingdom it is said to have gained in importance during the 
Middle kingdom.

<blockquote> "In addition to the importance of the Maat, several other principles within Ancient 
Egyptian law were essential, including an adherence to tradition as opposed to change, the importance 
of rhetorical skill, and the significance of achieving impartiality, and social justice. In one Middle 
Kingdom (2062 to c. 1664 BCE) text the Creator declares "I made every man like his fellow". Maat called 
the rich to help the less fortunate rather than exploit them, echoed in tomb declarations: "I have given 
bread to the hungry and clothed the naked" and "I was a husband to the widow and father to the 
orphan".[10] "
"Source":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maat</blockquote>

So it seems that after a really bad calamity the political class decides that something profound 
has to be done in order to strengthen political stability. Like after World War II (4000 years later 
that is) when there was the wider New Deal/ Social democratic consensus/Soziale 
Marktwirtschaft system which implied that sustained political stability would require a profound 
betterment in the conditions of the common man; in conjunction with the "Bretton-Woods 
system":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system it helped to improve living 
conditions in the western world at an unprecedented scale; and also real wages did stagnate ever 
since it was abandoned in the late seventies.

Another point is that as the climate turns bad, things turn nasty and people turn ugly; For 
example the "Bronze age collapse":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bronze_Age_collapse is said to 
be due in part to a worsening climate triggered by a "monumental Volcano 
eruption":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hekla_3_eruption ; the Middle ages got really nasty after 
the onset of the "Little Ice Age":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Ice_Age 

I wonder what the political implications of worsening economic conditions due to global 
warming will look like. How will our present day enlightened political culture justify a return to a 
nasty order of things? I guess they will find an answer, they always do ... Kurt Vonnegut said 
that our society is basically "addicted to cheap 
oil":http://www.inthesetimes.com/article/cold_turkey/  now that period is clearly coming to an 
end.

(Current Music: "The Great Nations of Europe in the 16th 
Century":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ua0pR06pevU
<notextile>
<iframe width="425" height="349" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/ua0pR06pevU" 
frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</notextile>




